---
layout: default
title: Background
link: /background/
menu: top
weight: 1
---

### Opening up Big Data in Finance
The City does not have the strongest record when it comes to transparency. Until 1969 banks were exempt from publicly revealing their true profits, a requirement imposed on other kinds of companies long before then.  Although more recently the 'third pillar' of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) global standards of best bank practice encouraged financial firms to make more data open, the sector as a whole remains opaque. This situation may have both caused and prolonged the recent financial crisis. Firstly, imperfect and asymmetric information in markets resulted in the mispricing of financial instruments. Once the crisis struck, an orderly re-pricing of these instruments could not occur because investors were uncertain about all the terms and conditions embedded within them.  According to Donald Kohn, member of the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC), "Complex and poorly understood instruments were at the heart of the crisis. Transparency about these structures—full information about them readily available to all market participants—is required to protect financial stability."

Regulatory lessons like this are often learned following financial crises. Following the failure of the City of Glasgow Bank in the nineteenth century, for example, Parliament passed the 1879 Companies Act mandating for the first time that banks publish their balance sheets.  Once again open data is an important component of post-crisis regulatory reforms. Thus the very first policy recommendation of the FPC in June 2011 advised micro-prudential regulators to make public disclosure of sovereign and banking sector exposures by major UK banks a permanent part of their reporting framework.  

Regulation of the conventional financial sector is following where innovative firms in the private sector are leading. Take ‘peer-to-peer’ (P2P) platforms that have grown rapidly following the financial crisis. In brief P2P platforms are online sites that channel funds from investors to borrowers. At this basic level they are much like banks. However, unlike banks, P2P platforms usually do not invest these funds solely at their own discretion.  Instead some enable investors to directly make investment decisions by choosing the borrowers they fund or allowing investors to define the general social or financial features of the projects in which they want to invest. As a rule of thumb, the specific relationships made between investors and borrowers on P2P platforms are more transparent then when those relationships are indirectly constituted through banks.

Transparency also characterises the approach many P2P platforms take to publicly disclosing data about their business. For example, the largest P2P platform in the UK, makes its loan-by-loan data publicly available through its website. The data is downloadable in an Excel file and contains every loan Funding Circle has intermediated, whether outstanding or already paid off, since it started trading in 2010. The dataset includes a wide range of information on these loans, including the original credit band of the borrower, purpose of the loan, the loan term and loan amount, the interest rate, and the next repayment date of the loan, among other characteristics. The data are regularly updated, generally by the close of business each day.

This project expands Funding Circle’s open data set with additions from RateSetter and Zopa. Together these platforms comprise over 92 percent of the UK P2P market.  As far as we are aware, this project is therefore the most comprehensive snapshot of the UK P2P market published to date. This is a tangible benefit for the participating firms in this study because it sheds light on the wider P2P market in which they compete. It may also benefit the wider public by providing a more comprehensive picture of market prices. This information can lead consumers to make better decisions and the P2P market overall to become more efficient.

The P2P market is increasingly important, growing from practically nil before the financial crisis to a cumulative size of at least £378 million in the UK in May 2013.  Two factors account for its rapid growth. First, investors have been attracted by the relatively high rate of returns available by lending in this market, given the current low yield in bank and other conventional debt instruments. There is also evidence that the P2P market is outperforming equities. For example, according to West One Loans, direct lending  to small growth companies via P2P sites has delivered higher returns than investing in smaller companies’ shares in the year to 31 March 2013.

At the same time, growth of the P2P market has been underpinned by increasing demand from borrowers as liquidity from conventional sources has dried up. Last year the Breedon Review estimated demand for new funding by all businesses exceeded supply between £84 billion and £191 billion,  with small and medium enterprises (SMEs) facing particular difficulties obtaining funds.  This is a result of banks becoming more risk adverse because of their own and regulators’ concerns regarding the adequacy of their capital to absorb potential losses. That being so, new flows of lending to SMEs have contracted, with a 271 percent increase in the number of unsuccessful SME bank loan applications between 2007 and 2010.  A number of experimental financing initiatives have developed to fill the funding gap, with P2P platforms at the fore.

While a number of commentators have highlighted the important role P2P platforms are now playing in funding SME and consumer loans in the UK, the focus of this project is sharper. Specifically we focus on visualising the regional geography of lending in the UK P2P marketing. In so doing, we show which regions are net investors and recipients, and analyse lending in terms of volume and price. 

There are two key reasons for the geographic focus of this project. First, there are longstanding concerns in the UK about a perceived ‘North-South’ divide when it comes to obtaining investment, with the North perceived to be at a disadvantage when compared to regions in the South, particularly London.  We were therefore interested to understand to what extent, if any, P2P platforms are bridging this regional funding gap. The second reason for focusing on the geography of the market is more pragmatic. Although each P2P platform records a number of characteristics related to the loans they intermediate, they are not recorded in a standard way. For example, while all three P2P platforms document the purpose of the loan, these descriptions vary across platforms and so are not easily comparable.  Our focus on geography therefore had the advantage that the data was already standardised in terms of postcode.

As such this project has wider public purchase. In particular the Government has recently expressed a desire for financial firms to disclose postcode-level lending data to assess if there are geographical imbalances as to which regions receive funding and on what terms from banks.  We hope this project hastens the opening of such data. After all, if P2P platforms can make this data publically available, why not better financially resourced banks?

More generally, this project is a contribution to a growing economic literature which exploits micro-level datasets.  P2P platforms are particularly rich sites for conducting this kind of research because they are syndicated loan markets *in extremis*; that is, each loan is funded by multiple (often hundreds) of lenders.  So although our data set includes ‘only’ a total of 59,851 individual loans, the number of loan parts or individual loan contracts number nearly 14 million (13,924,547 rows).  Hence ours is ‘big’ data. A broader message of this project is that this sort of granular financial data is collectable in the age of terabyte warehouses, and analytically tractable with visualisation tools we demo here.